# Architecture

## Core Services

<figure markdown="1">
![Screenshot](img/architecture/architecture.svg)
</figure>

Lamassu has been designed to be modular and keep the core services as simple as
possible encapsulating on each service a set of well defined responsibilities.
The core services are those that bring the main functionalities of a modern PKI
for industrial IoT use cases. The core services are:

### CA

The Certificate Authority is the service in charge of issuing and managing the
life cycle of the certificate. This service manages two different types of
certificates:

- **PKI Certificates**: This kind of certificates are used by regular end
  entities such as the devices that connect to the PKI.
- **Internal Certificates**: In contrast with the previous type of certificates,
  these certificate authorities have a more restricted use. Their creation
  should be limited to the most trusted entities of the PKI. For instance, DMS
  certificates are issued by an internal CA named _LAMASSU-DMS-MANAGER_ that is
  created on boot up. For the moment this is the only internal CA that is
  supported by Lamassu, but we are exploring the possibility of managing the
  certificates used by the services themselves.

On top of the regular functionalities that can be performed on this service such
as creating new CAs, issuing or revoking certificates, this service is in charge
of maintaining an accurate state of the managed entities (both CA certificates
and regular certificates). In order to do so, a periodic task is scheduled once
a day to check the status of validity of all certificates.

!!! warning This feature does not perform well on deployments that have issued
many certificates as it is performed on a sequential single threaded process. We
are working on a solution to improve this.

There are 4 different status that a certificate can have:

<figure markdown="1">
![Screenshot](img/architecture/ca-status.png){: style="width:225px" .center}
</figure>

The _Active_ state indicates that a certificate is valid and can be trusted by
end entities. The _Expired_ state indicates that a certificate has reached its
expiration date and is no longer valid and cannot be trusted anymore. The
_Revoked_ state is used by PKI admins when a security incident or unexpected
situations arise and the certificate or CA certificate is no longer trusted.
Recently a new state has been added to the CA service, the _About to expire_
state. This state indicates, as the name suggests, that the certificate will
expire shortly. The current threshold is set to 30 days and cannot be
configured. This state doesn't affect the validity of the certificate, but it is
used to notify the PKI admins that the certificate is about to expire and they
should take action.

The CA service uses a relational database to store the issued certificates and
basic information regarding the provisioned CAs. To configure the database
connection, set the following environment variables:

| Environment Variable | Description | | -------------------- |
------------------------------------------------------------- | |
POSTGRES_HOSTNAME | Hostname or address to connect to a running postgres
database | | POSTGRES_PORT | Port for the postgres instance | |
POSTGRES_DATABASE | Database to use | | POSTGRES_USERNAME | Username credentials
| | POSTGRES_PASSWORD | Password credentials |

This service has been redesigned to support multiple **crypto engines**
backends. Originally the only supported engine was the one provided by Hashicorp
Vault, but the new redesign implementation allows for a more flexible _golang
like_ approach, that is by using the `crypto.Signer` interface. Any new crypto
engine can be added by implementing this interface.

To provision the CA service with a crypto engine set the following environment
variable:

| Environment Variable | Description | | -------------------- |
------------------------------ | | ENGINE | `pkcs11` | `gopem` | `vault` |

The current supported crypto engines are:

- **pkcs11**: To Use the HSM crypto engine, define the following environment
  variables before launching the CA service:

| Environment Variable | Description | | -------------------- |
--------------------------------------- | | PKCS11_DRIVER | Path to the PKCS11
driver file | | PKCS11_LABEL | Label used by the token to be used | | PKCS11_PIN
| PIN code to login and operate the token |

- **gopem** - Files

| Environment Variable | Description | | -------------------- |
-------------------------------------------------------------------------- | |
GOPEM_DATA | Directory where the generated private keys belonging to each CA are
stored |

Although this new design is easier to maintain and operate, we are also keeping
the previous implementation of the Hashicorp Vault that does not follow the new
interface. The reason being that in order to provide a Vault implementation that
follows the new interface, the Enterprise Vault license is required. This is a
limitation that we are working on to overcome with the new crypto engine design.
The new standard deployment deprecates the use of Vault as the main backend and
instead a Software HSM known as
[SoftHSM v2](https://github.com/opendnssec/SoftHSMv2).

- **vault** - Hashicorp Vault

| Environment Variable | Description | | --------------------- |
--------------------------------------------------------------------- | |
VAULT_ADDRESS | Protocol, hostname and port to a vault instance:
`https://vault:8200` | | VAULT_ROLE_ID | Role ID used by the CA service to login
to vault | | VAULT_SECRET_ID | Secret ID used by the CA service to login to
vault | | VAULT_CA | Path to the CA certificate file for `https` connections | |
VAULT_UNSEAL_KEY_FILE | Path to the unseal vault keys | | VAULT_PKI_CA_PATH |
Prefix to use while creating new PKI vault secrets |

### DMS Manager

The DMS Manager is the service in charge of managing the Registration Authority
of the PKI. Instead of having a centralized Registration Authority, Lamassu uses
a decentralized approach to be easily integrated by Device Manufacturing
Systems. This way, each DMS has the authority to request the issuance of a
certificate for a device being manufactured. Instead of relying on just one
registration authority, Lamassu delegates the authorization of the issuance to
the
[Local Registration Authority or LRA](https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/local_registration_authority).

Each DMS is entitled to authorize the issuance of a certificate to a subset of
CAs of the entire PKI defined by the administrator. Each DMS has a list of
authorized CAs that may be used during the enrollment process. Once an
enrollment process is initiated, the PKI will check that the provided DMS
certificate is authorized to issue certificates for the requested CA. The
authorization list can be updated to add newly created CAs or remove CAs that
are no longer needed.

The DMS certificates that are used to authenticate the DMS are issued by an
internal CA named _LAMASSU-DMS-MANAGER_. This CA is created by default when the
PKI is deployed as stated earlier.

In Lamassu there are two different types of DMS **Manual DMS** and **Cloud
Hosted DMS**. In the Manual DMS the communications between the Device and the
DMS does not follow a standard and is done according to the needs/requirements
of the device, instead, in the Cloud Hosted DMS the communication between the
device and the DMS is done using the EST protocol. On the other hand, in Cloud
Hosted DMS mode the device to communicate with the DMS and to be able to request
a Certificate must have a Bootstrap certificate. By means of this certificate
the DMS authorizes or rejects the device's request. In Manual DMS mode the
authorization is done manually by the operator.

<figure markdown="1">
![Screenshot](img/dms-mode.png)
</figure>

The DMS Manager service uses a relational database to store the list of
authorised CAs and basic information regarding the provisioned DMS certificates.
To configure the database connection, set the following environment variables:

| Environment Variable | Description | | -------------------- |
------------------------------------------------------------- | |
POSTGRES_HOSTNAME | Hostname or address to connect to a running postgres
database | | POSTGRES_PORT | Port for the postgres instance | |
POSTGRES_DATABASE | Database to use | | POSTGRES_USERNAME | Username credentials
| | POSTGRES_PASSWORD | Password credentials |

- **CA** - The DMS service uses a Lamassu CA Client to update the status of the
  internal CA _LAMASSU-DMS-MANAGER_

| Environment Variable | Description | | -------------------- |
---------------------------------------------------- | | LAMASSU_CA_ADDRESS |
Lamassu CA service name and port : `ca:8087` | | LAMASSU_CA_CERT_FILE | Path to
the internal CA |

### Device manager

At its core, the device manager is the main entry point for the enrollment
process. It implements the EST protocol that must be used to obtain new
certificates. On top of that, this service manages the registration of new
devices and to keep a track of the device status. Similar to the CA service, the
device manager also schedules a periodic task to check the status of the
devices. This task is launched once a day to check the status of validity of all
certificates associated by each device. !!! warning This feature does not
perform well on deployments that have issued many certificates as it is
performed on a sequential single threaded process. We are working on a solution
to improve this.

There are 5 different status a device can have:

<figure markdown="1">
![Screenshot](img/architecture/device-status.png){: style="width:225px" .center}
</figure>

The _Pending Provisioning_ state reflects that a device entity has been created
but no certificate has been issued yet. The _Fully Provisioned_ state indicates
that a device has all the device slots with active certificates. The _With
warnings_ state indicates that a device has one or more slots with certificates
that are either expired or have been revoked. The _Requires Action_ state
indicates that a device has one or more slots with certificates that are about
to expire. The _Decommissioned_ state indicates that a device has been
decommissioned and no longer needs to be tracked by the PKI.

Each device can have certificates signed by different authorised CAs. Slots are
used to link a particular device with a CA. Each Slot can store multiple
certificates, but only one of them can be in an ACTIVE status.

The Device Manager service uses a relational database to store the information
of the devices, certificates and slots, also, logs of devices and slots are
created when an specific action is carried out, for example, in the creation. To
configure the database connection, set the following environment variables:

| Environment Variable | Description | | -------------------- |
------------------------------------------------------------- | |
POSTGRES_HOSTNAME | Hostname or address to connect to a running postgres
database | | POSTGRES_PORT | Port for the postgres instance | |
POSTGRES_DATABASE | Database to use | | POSTGRES_USERNAME | Username credentials
| | POSTGRES_PASSWORD | Password credentials |

- **CA** - The Device Manager service uses a Lamassu CA Client to update the
  status of the certificates associated to the devices

| Environment Variable | Description | | -------------------- |
---------------------------------------------------- | | LAMASSU_CA_ADDRESS |
Lamassu CA service name and port: `ca:8087` | | LAMASSU_CA_CERT_FILE | Path to
the internal CA |

- **DMS** - The Device Manager service uses a DMS Client to update the status of
  the certificates associated to the devices

| Environment Variable | Description | | ----------------------------- |
--------------------------------------------------------------- | |
LAMASSU_DMS_MANAGER_ADDRESS | Lamassu DMS service name and port:
`dms-manager:8085` | | LAMASSU_DMS_MANAGER_CERT_FILE | Path to the internal DMS
|

- **Other** - Other configuration variables

| Environment Variable | Description | | --------------------- |
---------------------------------------------------------------------- | |
MINIMUM_REENROLL_DAYS | The minimum days that a certificate must be valid in
order to reenroll |

### Cloud Proxy

The Cloud Proxy allows integrating CAs created in cloud providers, it is in
charge of syncronizing the data between cloud providers and the data of Lamassu.
In particular, Lamassu incorporates AWS and Azure Cloud integration.

The Cloud Proxy service uses a relational database, to store the information of
the Lamassu CAs and to assign a connector Id. The connector will be used to bind
each Lamassu CA to their equivalent in the external cloud providers. To
configure the database connection, set the following environment variables:

| Environment Variable | Description | | -------------------- |
------------------------------------------------------------- | |
POSTGRES_HOSTNAME | Hostname or address to connect to a running postgres
database | | POSTGRES_PORT | Port for the postgres instance | |
POSTGRES_DATABASE | Database to use | | POSTGRES_USERNAME | Username credentials
| | POSTGRES_PASSWORD | Password credentials |

- **Consul** - Cloud connectors are dynamically registered, to have a record of
  what services exist, they self-register in consul. Cloud Proxy consumes consul
  to ask which service are registered.

| Environment Variable | Description | | -------------------- |
----------------------------------------------------- | | CONSUL_PROTOCOL |
Protocol used to connect to consul instance : `https` | | CONSUL_HOST | Hostname
to a running consul instance | | CONSUL_PORT | Port for the consul instance | |
CONSUL_CA | Path to the internal CA |

- **CA** - The Device Manager service uses a Lamassu CA Client to update the
  status of the certificates associated to the devices

| Environment Variable | Description | | -------------------- |
---------------------------------------------------- | | LAMASSU_CA_ADDRESS |
Lamassu CA service name and port: `lamassu-ca:8087` | | LAMASSU_CA_CERT_FILE |
Path to the internal CA |

### Alerts

Alerts is the service in charge of sending mails. Users can be subscribed to
particular events, such as, when a certificate is about to expire, and they will
be notified via mail.

Events from all services above (Lamassu CA, DMS Manager and Device Manager) that
create, revoke or modify the status of any certificate publish a message to
RabbitMQ broker. The message sent to the "alerts" queue will be consumed by the
Alerts service and will send a mail to all the users subscribed to that event.

<figure markdown="1">
![Screenshot](img/rabbitMQ.png){: style="width:500px" .center}
</figure>

Alerts service uses a relational database, to store the information of
subscriptions and last executed events information. To configure the database
connection, set the following environment variables:

| Environment Variable | Description | | -------------------- |
------------------------------------------------------------- | |
POSTGRES_HOSTNAME | Hostname or address to connect to a running postgres
database | | POSTGRES_PORT | Port for the postgres instance | |
POSTGRES_DATABASE | Database to use | | POSTGRES_USERNAME | Username credentials
| | POSTGRES_PASSWORD | Password credentials |

- **Configuration** - Alerts service allows custom configuration to send SMTP
  mails, such as:

| Environment Variable | Description | | -------------------- |
-------------------------------------------------------------- | | SMTP_FROM |
Email address of the sender of alerts generated by the service | | SMTP_INSECURE
| Boolean value to enable or disable secure SMTP session | | SMTP_ENABLE_SSL |
Boolean value to enable or disable SSL connection | | SMTP_USERNAME | Username
credentials | | SMTP_PASSWORD | Password credentials | | SMTP_HOST | Hostname or
address to SMTP server: `25` | | SMTP_PORT | Port for the SMTP instance |

- **Templates** - Alerts service allows custom configuration to send SMTP mails,
  such as:

| Environment Variable | Description | | -------------------- |
-------------------------------------------------------------- | | TEMPLATE_HTML
| Template in HTML format to create mail format | | TEMPLATE_JSON | Template in
JSON format to rename queue names by readable text |

### OCSP

OCSP (Online Certificate Status Protocol) service, allows to determine the
validity status of an X.509 digital certificate.

OCSP service's response must be signed with a public private key, so the
following variables must be specified.

| Environment Variable | Description | | -------------------- |
---------------------------------------------------- | | SIGNER_CERT | Lamassu
CA service name and port: `ca:8087` | | SIGNER_KEY | Path to the internal CA |

- **CA** - OCSP service uses a Lamassu CA Client to update the status of the
  certificates associated to the devices

| Environment Variable | Description | | -------------------- |
---------------------------------------------------- | | LAMASSU_CA_ADDRESS |
Lamassu CA service name and port: `ca:8087` | | LAMASSU_CA_CERT_FILE | Path to
the internal CA |

## Lamassu Compose

Lamassu Compose offers a SECURE deployment of the set of microservices required
to manage an industrial PKI. The architecture presented on the following image
reflects the interconnection of the different services mainly using the HTTP
Protocol. The use of this deployment offers the following non functional
requirements by leveraging the use of an API Gateway:

- **Centralized point of access**: Each microservice listens on a different port
  which ends up being challenging for developers and users. With the use of the
  API Gateway, the user will always access the same host and port address. Port
  `80` for HTTP connections and port `443` for HTTPS connections.

- **Authentication**: In order to invoke any endpoint, the API Gateway enforces
  each request to present a JWT. Upon receiving an HTTP request, the gateway
  validates the presented token against the authentication server.

- **Authorization**: Another key aspect is enforcing an authorization schema.
  Lamassu has been configured in such way that only specific endpoints are
  accessible by non admin users.

- **Tracing**: Logging the life of an HTTP request can be helpful during the
  debugging process of such complex application. The tracing aspect eases this
  process by injecting a unique identifier to each request that is then printed
  out by each microservice logs.

- **Mutual TLS authentication**: As mentioned earlier the gateway acts as the
  traffic orchestrator knowing where each service is and redirecting the traffic
  accordingly. To prevent any unauthorized request as well as protecting the
  communications channel between the Gateway itself and the upstream service,
  the API Gateway initiates a mutual TLS connection to ensure such thing.

![Screenshot](img/architecture/architecture.svg)

## Cloud Providers Add-ons
